What were the opinions or maybe even their
evaluation of veterinary medicine of the
previous presidents and provosts before I went to
the president's office? Starting with, I think,
the team of Dr. Vandiver, who was present when I
came back here, and in the provost's office, with
Chuck McCandless and Gordon Eaton, there was a
real support of veterinary medicine, because I
think that they had been in the position long
enough to realize that this was the only
veterinary medical program in the state of Texas,
and that it was one of the top in the nation, and if it
were to remain top in the nation, that it was going
to require considerable attention. It had to have
increased funding. It had to have some new
facilities. And one of the greatest chores I had
when I was still back in the veterinary medical
school was to get the new large animal teaching
hospital and the new research building. And the
college could not have been a top university
without those and was going to be on probation. Who
deserves most credit for bringing that into
reality? Well,
I, you know, you don't want to say I did something,
but George Shelton and I went to the mat on those
facilities, and we finally convinced the
university, we finally convinced Ed Peel, who was
Vice Chancellor for Facilities and Planning and
we convinced Mr. Weisenbaker and the other
members of the Board of Regents and actually took
them to see the facilities and how antiquated and
old they were and that it was absolutely essential
that we have them. Who were the, on the Board of
Regents, who started out being the strongest
proponents?
I don't know that we really got into that until we
had convinced the building committee and Mr.
Weisenbaker. And once we had done that, it was a
pretty easy sale. We had to also convince Dr.
Atkinson, who was chancellor. And he saw the need.
And of course, being a premier scientist, he
clearly knew that the research component was so
critical to us. and he became one of our staunch
supporters and I think really helped gain the
support of the Board of Regents. All right, then
after
President Vandenberg, who's next? Bill Mobley
followed him. Oh, okay. And before you went over to
work with him, what did you think his level of
concern for veterinary medicine was? Well, Bill
probably did not know much about veterinary
medicine. But having sat on the dean's council and
having been given a background, at least from the
I guess, communication process and interchange
that would occur there, had a great appreciation
for what that program meant. I think not only to
Texas A&M University, but to the system and to the
state. And he became a very strong supporter. And
of course, with my background, he would rely upon
me, but we were both very careful to never do
anything that would signify that we might be given
preference to veterinary medicine because we
weren't. It was just one of the strong programs
that had to continue its advancement and had to
have the kind of funding required to do that. And it
was looked at as a program that would not be a drain
but a complement to A&M, and particularly since it
had now become line item. And then he was able to be a
great spokesperson for the program. Who in Austin
were the greatest help in that line item status?
Bob Bullock was a real help in that. The
coordinating board was, and Ken Ashworth really
did help us a lot. Jimmy Bond was vice chancellor
and handled a lot of the state affairs. He really
did help. And just many of the legislators like
Rick Perry, for instance, was one that really did
help us. And most of, even Senate Finance
Committee, the House Appropriations Committee.
Once they had the endorsement of the University
and the Chancellor, they had the endorsement of
the Coordinating Board and the Legislative
Budget Board. We probably had to work hardest in
convincing the Legislative Budget Board than
any. But once they did and they saw the parallel to
the medical and dental schools, then they became
very supportive. All right, and you're in this
notch as the assistant to the president, chief of
staff, and executive for how long? I was only in
that role for one year. And Gordon Eaton and Chuck
McAnus leave to go to Iowa State. And Don
McDonnell, his title was vice president.
Academic, Vice President for Academic Affairs
and Provost. Okay, and then what was your title? Or
was it the same under him? No, mine changed. Mine
was given the title of Senior Vice President and
Provost. And that was purposely done to signify
that it was the second administrative officer of
the university. We were already laying the
groundwork for the endowment campaign. That was
the vision that Bill had knowing that long term
that we had to rely probably less on the available
university fund and what the state appropriation
was and begin to look at what other universities
had to do many, many years earlier and that was to
have a great increase in our overall endowment. So
knowing that he was going to be out a lot with that
campaign and dealing with an external
constituency and the alumni, the former
students, and then also to devote a lot of his time
to the legislative side of the university to
increase and help our state funding. Because we
were at a time where, quite honestly, state
funding was not increasing at the same as it had
been in the past. So with all of those in mind and
knowing that a lot of the heart of the university is
the academic area anyway, he changed the title to
Senior Vice President and Provost so that when he
was gone, the shoulders, the responsibilities of
the presidency would be in my lap that day or those
days. Right. So you were a staff member. officer
for him, the deans did not report directly to you?
Yes. Oh, they did? Yes. All the deans reported to
me, all the libraries, student admissions, all
the vice presidents, the research program, the
faculty. What about your, on a diagram chart, what
was your relationship to Donald McDonald then?
Oh, I replaced him. Oh, you replaced Donald.
Donald left and went to American University in
Egypt. In Egypt, okay. And then I went through the
whole selection process and was his, I succeeded
him. All right, I'm confused then. Eaton?
McDonald followed. All right. And Eaton is there
for about a year after you for your first year? No.
No. McDonald had been named provost a year or two
before I became executive assistant and chief of
staff. Oh, I see. Okay. Describe the working, the
leadership style of Bill Mobley and his greatest
joys and his greatest pet peeves or frustrations.
Well, it was interesting because he was one of the
premier administrators that I have ever worked
with. I would characterize Bill as a visionary
leader who tried to select competent people and
delegated to them and held them accountable. He
had a real vision for A&M. He had an incredible
loyalty. He was also a people person who really
cared about the people that he led. His greatest
joys had to come from the success of the endowment
campaign, the success that we had in elevating all
of the academic and research programs at this
university. The greatest heart burns that he and I
both shared would have been having to handle the
athletic problems and we both went through the
times where The university was under intense
scrutiny from investigative reporters and
newspapers and all kinds of questions about a lot
of the business processes and things that were
happening even in the border regions. So those
were the more difficult sides of it. But the great
accomplishments in times of real fruit-bearing
related to really the heart of the university, and
that would be the academic side. In terms of
personal things, what were his, did he have any pet
peeves, special kind of coffee? Well, it was
interesting because, yeah, he did. One thing that
I, I was always afraid to ride with Bill because he,
the first several years he smoked a pipe, And he
would be trying to smoke his pipe and light it, talk
on the phone and drive all at the same time in
Houston. And I would sit there with pushing my foot
in the floor many times, worried about him. And
Bill was one of those people, too, who really got
hyper-focused when there was an issue or when
there was an opportunity. And I never will forget
coming back from Houston one day. We had been to
Austin and back the day before, and we'd gone to
Houston, and we get right outside South College
Station, and we stop at this red light, and his car
runs out of gas. And I just envisioned, here we are,
the president and senior vice president and
provost of Texas A&M University pushing his car to
a fill-in station, which was fortunately only
about 100 yards up the road. And for some reason, he
tried to crank it one time. It started, he gave it a
big push, and he gave it enough gas that we rolled in
dead, dead engine, into the gas station. Oh, no,
that's a good one. That's a good one. All right,
what about his pet, Joey? Is that something he
really enjoyed? Bill really enjoyed the
interaction with students. He had a real heart for
students, and he really enjoyed the times that he
had with them. We had a lot of events for students at
the house, the president's home, at the MSC. Bill
loved to make speeches, and I think those were real
times of joy. Did anybody prepare them for him? A
lot of times Mary Helen Bowers would prepare. Bill
was notorious about deviating from the text in
fact he usually got up and would make the statement
to the crowd that my wife says I make two mistakes
with all my speeches one is I deviate from my text
and the second is I return to my text he was
notorious about doing that but he always had a
message and he always had a speech that reflected
the good of what Texas A&M was about. Were the
speeches normally written out in full or just an
outline of topics? Most of his were written out in
full, but he frequently would just put the notes in
his pocket and go extemporaneously. Who would he
turn to most often for input, suggestions,
opinions? The Vice Presidents. We had the
President's Council meeting every Monday. And he
would turn to all of us in those situations. If it
were an academic matter, clearly he would call me.
If it were a student matter, he clearly would call
John Colas, who was vice president for student
affairs. If it was a matter of operations and
administration, it was Robert Smith at that time.
So he was a very trusting individual and a very
delegating individual. And Bill was a person who
rarely praised in private, but he had a great
ability to praise the people around him who were
giving contributions to the overall good of the
university in public. You never knew when it was
going to come. For example? He would do it. For
example? If it perhaps would be a group of former
students or a group in one of the college's
development council and I was there and we'd done
something in the academic side that was going to
make a difference, he would just give credit
maybe. And he was good at remembering to do that. Of
the groups that he spoke to, which ones do you think
he enjoyed speaking with most and least?
Probably he enjoyed speaking to former students
groups the most, as well as one other. Bill had this
vision also of the international dimension
coming into Annan University. And he should be
given credit. for infusing that dimension into
every segment of this university. That's a good
point. And he loved to talk to groups about that
particular topic and what it meant to the future of
this university.
Probably the least
would be the same as mine. Some of the legislative
budget hearings, those are probably the hardest
and most grilling. Can you give an example of? Oh,
man, we went through one time in the House
Appropriations. It seems like that the group was
in a nasty mood most of the time for some reason that
was beyond us. And they had a tough chairman at that
time. And we followed the University of Houston.
And the University of Houston had had some
questionable things that had arisen with a letter
that had been sent out regarding even a member of
the House Appropriations Committee. And we
followed them in giving our budget presentation.
And they were not in a good mood when we walked in.
And I remember that to this day. We called them when
we left. We said, that wasn't a hearing, that was an
inquisition. And those were real challenging
times. During those years, you all were quartered
where? Where were the key demonstrators? I moved a
lot. when I became chief of staff
then when I became president I moved back to the
Koch building and then about a few months later or
no more probably than a year then I moved to to the
administration building on the front of the
campus. And I was able there to bring all of the
other academic units in with me, with the
exception of research. The Chancellor's full
operation moved to the headquarters off campus
next to Hilton. And then, of course, when I became
president later, I moved back to . So I moved a lot.
Let's see.
Describe your vice presidential level
colleagues at that point under Dr. Mobley. Robert
Smith was vice president for administration and
operations. Did he predate you? All of them
predated me. John Coldis was vice president for
student affairs. Bob Walker was vice president
for development. And
which one am I leaving out?
That was it. That's it. We had a very small upper
administration for the side university. How
often did you all meet? We met every Monday morning
at 8 o'clock in the president's office. What was
the nature of those meetings? Everything that
could come up and every issue that was facing us We
had an agenda. We had an agenda. We had an agenda. We
had an agenda. Were you encouraged to be candid in
those sessions? Oh, absolutely. We were
encouraged to be candid and nothing held back and
share things that needed to be shared. Can you
share any anecdotes of high points, low points,
happy moments or sad moments? Well, a lot of happy
moments clearly were times where we had made a
legislative success, where we had been able to
recruit a strategic administrator, a dean, a
department head, where maybe we'd gotten a
substantial research grant that meant a lot to the
university, where we had gotten maybe a new
facility that we had proposed to the Board of
Regents. Just those things that made a big
difference, or we'd gotten a big development
grant to the university, or somebody made an
enormous gift. Those were the better things that
happened. The harder things were some of the
things that happened at that time. We had some
corps issues. There were some incidences of
harassment of women in the corps that had come to
surface. We had the NCAA issue. And then some of the
other kinds of things that had been developing
with the Dallas Morning News and investigative
reporting about there was an impropriety or
something somewhere. You know, just those things
that when an operation is that huge, you want
everything to go well, to not be questioned. and
that there would be no downers and all positives,
but that is never going to be the utopia that you
would reach. And Dr. Atkinson was the chancellor
during that time. Dr. Atkinson was the chancellor
during almost all of that time, yeah. And he was a
positive factor. He was a very positive factor and
very supportive. It was good because
Dr. Mobley had a great partnership with Dr.
Atkinson, and I had a great partnership with Dr.
Mobley and Dr. Atkinson. So the three of us were
able to form a very close team of looking at the
overall academic focus and programs and statue of
the university with the same kind of goals. So we
were on the same page. And Dr. Atkinson was
fighting for us in Washington, he was fighting for
us in Austin, and he was very astute at doing it. And
many times, too, when we would go to the Board of
Regents, for instance, we were all three working
together on the issues, and there was a
consolidated, unified effort of what we were
doing. walk through this whole athletic problem?
How did it begin and so forth? Well, there were more
than one. I got in on the tail end of the Jackie
Sherrill time, and Bill had to take a strong stand
there. So as Jackie was being terminated, I came
into the president's office. Now what was the
central issue of the Sherrill problem? Well, that
there were improper payments made to some student
athletes from Dallas Boosters. I don't know all of
the details because I really did not handle that
one. Then when I was executive assistant and chief
of staff, And I believe before I had become senior
vice president and provost, there was a
basketball issue. And Bill had to deal with that
one. I did not. And then as Bill was leaving the
president's position to become chancellor of the
system, and I was taking over as president of the
university, it was right in the middle of the last
NCA issue where eight student athletes had been
paid for working when in fact a lot of times they
were just sleeping on the job and that had
surfaced. Now these were football? These were all
football players. And the head coach at that time
was? R.C. was head coach. Oh, okay. And he was upset
about it as you could imagine because he had made a
pledge and a commitment that this would never
happen, this would be a clean program. And there
was no institutional involvement whatsoever. It
was all outside and alumnus involved in it. Do you
feel comfortable in describing your opinion of
the attitude that Bill Mobley took about these
violations? I would be very honored to express
what Bill had as an opinion on it because he took
only the highest road of integrity that could be
taken and quite frankly he and I worked for all
those years together as hard as we could to put in a
model program that was far and above the NCAA
requirements because we could not afford to have
any kind of problem arise. And we had the
cooperation of everyone. And I would venture to
say that even today, a lot of the things that other
universities are now doing are things that are
modeled after the things that were put in place
through those three times of real trouble. What
were some of the things y'all put in place? Well,
number one was that the academics would be
monitored very carefully. There'd be no
questioning those. The student athletes had to
register what cars they had. They had to then
register where they would be working. They had to
sign when they signed on a letter of intent at A&M
that if they broke the rules themselves that they
would lose their scholarships. We had compliance
officers which were new at the time. I mean there
were so many new things put in place and completely
upheld by the athletic council. And you hate to
have to do that and to be so rigid and so almost
bureaucratic quite frankly. But we had no option
because we could not have another issue and we
didn't want anything to happen in our program. We
had a big education system put into place where we
would actually try to educate the former students
and anyone of what they could and could not do. So it
was rigid. Am I correct in here having heard the
report that on one occasion Dr. Mobley as
president
in a real showdown over the Jackie Sherrill matter
turned in his resignation if they did not, if the
board did not support him. If the board had not
supported him when he first came into the
presidency, and this was only a few months, in his
decision for Jackie to be removed because of what
he had done, he would have resigned as president.
He drew the line in the sand. And that was his
attitude from then forward, that A&M would only
run a clean program and have the utmost integrity
in it. I'm not going to ask the negative on this one.
Are there any regents at that time that are notable
for their support of the athletic standards? I
wasn't in the position at that time. to have seen
and to have known. But clearly they all had to come
to the forefront of supporting what we put in
place. Was Tom Adair the chairman of the Athletic
Council? Tom Adair was chairman of the Athletic
Council. What about his role in any of it? He was
strongly supportive of everything that we did.
And had really over a period of time developed a
presence on the national scene. So with that
national scene presence he had, you can imagine
his heart was also to have a model program here. And
that was our goal. Look, A&M is going to have a model
program. I'm proud to say that Jarvis one day asked
me if they needed another member on the athletic
council. And I told him that I thought Tom Adair
would be a very good person. And as far as I know,
he's still the faculty representative. He was
chairman the whole time I was in all the high level
positions. And I think still is. Yeah. Mobley
moves to the chancellor position. Am I correct in
remembering that one of the factors that caused
Perry Atkinson to step aside as chancellor was his
wife's health? I don't know all the reasons, but I
think that clearly that was one of them. His wife
had what proved to be fatal health problems, and I
knew that he needed and wanted to spend more time
with her. We hated to see him step out of that role
because he had really been a tremendous leader for
not only the system, but also we were the
benefactor of what he had done. All right. And then
Dr. Mobley then becomes the new chancellor, is
that right? He becomes the new chancellor, and
then I was named interim president. All right.
Describe any of the circumstances you can about
how that came about, how you learned about it, and
so forth. Well, when Bill was named
chancellor,
I don't even recall But I think he is the one that
called me and asked if I would serve as interim
president. And then I was probably called by the
chairman of the board to ask if I'd be willing to
serve in that role. And all of this was happening in
a rather short period of time. And I immediately
said yes because I had had such a part, I felt, of
putting in place so many things as Senior Vice
President and Provost in the academic area and the
research area and the graduate student area that I
wanted, in working with the endowment campaign,
that I didn't want to see a hiccup or a...